Is it running? It is running. Oh.
This is Alan Vines. I want to start in or continue
working on the period in which I was spending half
time in Washington and half time in Woods Hole.
The advent of
better instrumentation and of more laboratories
getting involved in oceanography
was very important.
Along about this time, Scripps got the RV Horizon.
so they could start making expeditions
with really a much better capability than
Atlantis was ever able to. By this, they had a
better choice of where they could go, how much they
could carry, and so forth.
All of the Of course, from where I sat in the working
with the Bureau of Ships administering the
laboratories, it seemed to me that the
laboratories operated together and on a somewhat
more
centralized, not centralized plan, but the
coordination was, it probably appeared better to
me than it did to many other people because So much
of it was being operated out of our desk. At that
time, I would presume the budgets at Woods Hole
were probably 80% from the Bureau of Ships. And at
Scripps, which had a great deal more state
financing, it was probably lower and down around
60%.
possibly 50%.
During this period in the Woods Hole work, in our
acoustic section, we were very heavily involved
with
convergent zone sonar and operated about
five major tests a year. Brackett Hersey was in the
acoustics work. Brackett Hersey was my boss at
Woods Hole. He had taken over the acoustics and was
chiefly responsible for the, deserves the
principal credit for the high quality of
acoustics work. trying to keep it much more
quantitative, certainly, than I ever would have.
Because I was more interested in the area,
oceanographic aspects of the business. And
Hersey was more interested
and involved in maintaining better acoustic
measurements and keeping information data that
we got more creditable in the eyes of professional
acousticians. That doesn't mean that either one
of us were negligent of the other aspects of it, but
that tended to be somewhat of an automatic
division of labor.
During this time, Islin was following the work
very closely advice, kibitzing, and helping us
out on a little bit better general interpretation
of how the ocean worked. Also during this time, the
Ewing and Warzel at the Lamont Laboratory, excuse
me, at the Columbia Laboratory,
heavily involved in the transmission problem
largely as it came out of geophysics. And both
Columbia and Woods Hole, largely through Hersey,
were heavily involved in doing acoustical
seismic tests and measurements. Most of this was
between the United States and the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge, because that was all the capability we had
with our ships.
At that time, most of the seismic operations were
two-ship operations involving one ship for
shooting and one ship for receiving.
So the general attitude was to take Atlantis and
whatever other ship we could get, and then as we
acquired more smaller ships, such as the Bear and
Karen, we had a wider variety of ships. But smaller
ones were confined largely within the Great
American Bight that is only out to Bermuda.
One word about the kinds of ships that were small
ships that were used then. Heaven knows they were
as good as many of the boats that fishermen used. So
from that standpoint, we weren't badly abused.
But they were fairly small, running from 60 to 90
feet. The amount of space on them was marginal,
very marginal, from the standpoint of getting any
reasonable amount of equipment aboard. Those
that were sailing ships had booms and masts and
stays in so many of the wrong places that they
couldn't be used very efficiently. And
while most of them were safe enough as far as
getting back, the weather didn't have to get very
heavy, but they got to where it was just plain
impossible to continue the work. So the
efficiency of these ships was not very high. And it
is One of the reasons why, along about this time, I
began to think much more that really the ship is the
principal instrument. And it was going to be
pretty hard for us to do better work than the ship
was capable of. So I started spending much more
time in the general concept of how can we improve
ships, and how can we go about getting better ones.
Didn't have to be very smart to do this because
after you beat your brains out on inferior ships at
sea, it looks like it's no good long-term solution
for either you or the future of the game.
By this time it was The general picture of the
geology of the ocean was beginning to open up a good
deal, the fact that there was a big lack of
sediments in the ocean.
The group at Columbia was the ringleader in this,
but it was becoming apparent from work that many
people were doing.
ONR was moving along, picking up funding, and
particularly the physical oceanography and
biological end was doing very much more. But they
were quite slow in working and financing problems
on instrumentation. This tended to remain more in
the Bureau of Ships budget
10 or 15 years later in the history of
oceanography, ONR was carrying the burden in
instrumentation. And NSF was only hiring people
or paying for ships. At the present time, it's
getting to where nobody wants to pay for advanced
instrumentation. And it is perhaps one reason
why, at the moment, we may be on a little bit more of a
technological plateau than is good for the
science.
Washington
was, as always, I suppose, organizing into
committees. There was a
group established. I can't think of their name
right now. In the oceanographic section, Dr.
Redfield was the head of it, was the chairman of it.
They held meetings around the country with
representatives from the laboratories, trying
to put a little more coherence into the
oceanographic plans. This committee by itself
did not really do a great deal of good, but it was
useful in helping all laboratories get together
and focus a little bit more communication between
labs. And then, as it turned out, when the Korean
War started, there was a little bit of a structure
so that people knew who to talk to. There was a
format in which advice could be sent around in a
semi-official fashion.
Lieutenant John Knauss, who was in the Office of
Naval Research, He was there about a year or so
while I was still at the Bureau of Ships. We spent a
great deal of time together because John was a very
alert young scientist who was disdained to go on in
oceanography.
Particularly, we had been shipmates on a trip that
on the Atlantis, in which I was chief scientist
down in the Cayman Trough operating out of
Guantanamo, in which we were very much interested
in the general current structure in the area south
of Guantanamo as to how it might affect
Navy tests in one way or another. But this
particular night in Washington, a short time
after the Korean War
broke out officially. This was perhaps within the
first day or second day. John and I made a list of the
sorts of things that oceanography needed in
preparation for for a much larger meeting the next
day. I've tried to find this piece of paper because
it was really kind of interesting. The principal
things I can remember was that it was very clear
that Woods Hole needed a building, needed more
space.
It was very clear that the Columbia people needed a
ship. And it was very clear that Scripps needed
more people. This has nothing to do with the
quality of the people at Scripps. It was just
merely that they had not built up as rapidly after
the war as some of the other organizations. And
while they were very strong in some aspects of
oceanography,
certainly needed more in the physical sense.
One of the advantages of having done a little bit of
homework is that sometimes it is surprisingly how
rapidly some of the suggestions get okayed and
executed. These
Woods Hole did end up with their laboratory of
oceanography, paid for by ONR, Columbia got
enough more money and enough assurance to where
Ewing could get the VEMA and then utilize the
Atlantis as a secondary ship rather than as a
primary ship. And without any question at all, the
VEMA has been one of the great ships of America and
of the oceanographic world in general in making
the business global.
After
leaving Washington and coming back to Woods Hole
for full time, although I still spent quite a bit of
time in Washington, the research work that I was
primarily concerned with remained the
instrumentation problems having to do with
salinity
corrected sensors.
I believe I mentioned earlier that Carl
Schleicher and Bradshaw had been hired to do this,
and they carried it on with quiet distinction. The
other was variable depth sonar, and
Starting about this time, the Navy began to get a
few experimental units. And I spent a modest
amount of time with the people in the fleet trying
to sell it, write manuals for its use, and in
general, try and help the Navy move in the
direction of aerobatic sonar. However, the
convergent zone sonar and working with submarine
people continued to be the principal thing I was
interested in. And about every two years, for a
good many years, I started making a trip to Hawaii
and working with comm sub pack to help them use
submarines, underwater sound and so forth, a
little more efficiently with submarines. This
was a continuation of the work that I had done there
during the war.
Submarine specific fleet was in many respects an
easier organization to work with than
submarine's Atlantic fleet. Because they were so
much further away, they weren't bothered by as
many people. So when you did get out there, you
found you generally got more cooperation. They
hadn't already been worn out by a dozen people just
like you.
One of the other aspects was that the Pacific runs
about half a mile deeper. Certainly the Hawaiian
area has deep water close at hand. So many of the
kinds of things we wanted to do, either for testing
or demonstration, were much easier to do in local
waters there than local waters off any of the
submarine bases in continental United States.
Why don't you shut it down for a while? Sure.
I have a series of questions to ask about this
period we're talking about right now. I have four
questions, as a matter of fact, from both the
previous tapes and this one. First of all, now that
ONR is beginning to carry more than its share of
research, What sort of oceanographers are they
bringing into ONR, and whose policy is it to bring
in what amounts to an oceanographer to work in an
ONR desk with regularity?
Well, Revell moved over there. I knew Revell went
over there. Revell went over there. Then he got
Gordon Lill as his right-hand man, who had been a
bathymograph officer during the war. And then he
got Art Maxwell. And this was the nucleus of their
oceanographic group.
And back when there were so few of them, and the
general picture was
people took positive attitudes instead of
negative attitudes. Committees hadn't grown up
yet. They had a great deal of of authority and
exercise. Is this on? Yes. So that is my, I think
that is the story of ONR. Then they started getting
people, scientists from various laboratories,
to come in and spend part time. This was very good
because it brought fresh people in for a while. It
also trained people. I believe, as I said earlier,
I can't emphasize too much the importance of
having some of our brightest young people, at
least while they're still in the impressionable
age, to get them into a group where they have to
think about a lot more than just themselves or just
their laboratory and start devoting more of their
time to the profession as a whole. I think this was
one of the reasons why Why so much occurred at that
time. All right, now that anticipates my second
question. Is the bringing in of these people to
work halftime in Onora, is this primarily a
training process on Onora's part? Does Ravel look
upon this as a? Oh, I don't think this was a
training. I think it was understood this would be
one of the results of it. But it was primarily a
question of how do you get talent there?
oftentimes you'd bring people in who had
specialties in a field that was real hot then. If
they were going to be in an ocean expedition, then
you might get people to come down who were somewhat
more specialists or involved in that particular
part of the work. So this rotation had a good deal to
do oftentimes had a good deal to do with the trend of
the research, which also was the trend of the
money. Because oceanography really almost
throughout its career, as I've known it, and
particularly perhaps not quite so much now
because we tend to have so many committees now, But
there would be sort of a base load for
oceanography, of which the budget could stand
about so much. And this was generally for general
purpose oceanography and for what you might call
the highly organized oceanography. Then special
problems would come up. For example, the
discovery of convergent zone sonar was one. That
probably shoved a 30% trenchant into the
budgeting of money. And it allocated not
narrowly, but at least broadly into one general
field. With discussions of things like the Indian
Ocean Expedition, which kicked around for a
couple of years to see whether people thought it
made sense, and many people Many people did not.
But it was an idea that would sell. It was an idea
that would keep the ships afloat, which is
something the modern people have little
comprehension about. If a laboratory only has one
ship, and you only see it's budgeting for it a
couple of months in advance, you think a lot harder
about what can we do to get enough financing to
where we can keep it going for a year or two at a time.
I think the budgeting of oceanography, and I don't
mean just the budgeting. I mean the way it worked,
the way it brought in people, the way it sold
itself, the way it convinced people that it was
doing things, was to keep taking on programs, some
of which were devised by individuals, others of
which, say, the Indian Ocean was one. Because it
was clear we knew very little about the Indian
Ocean. I was not heavily involved in that except a
little bit in the early planning. I did not go on any
of those Indian Ocean expeditions. But our
science knows so much more about the Indian Ocean
because of that expedition, even though many
people thought the original planning was very
poor. It at least happened.
I feel very strongly as a sort of a scientific
thesis that Mother Nature puts out interesting
things in white noise. It is unlikely
to... It is so unlikely that we can have an ocean
that is not interesting.
The ocean bottom, for example, is... One of the
reasons that I became interested in deep
submersibles was discussions that the bottom of
the ocean wasn't interesting just had to be wrong.
One couldn't conceive that 100 million square
miles of ocean bottom wasn't going to have some
extremely interesting places. And any technique
that would improve our ability to see find points
was important. That next question? Sure. When do
you begin to talk in the Bureau of Ships and ONR
about the necessity for NSF? Oh, this kind of thing
was all level way over my head. I was strictly a very
junior member of the game there. That kind of
thing, people, well,
Ravel,
for example, was in that circle.
Vannevar Bush was in that circle. Some of these
people, there were debates as to whether it made
good sense or not. But there was no question what
some of the best scientific minds of the country
were involved in. But that was at several pecking
orders higher than I was. I was still a lucky young
man who was in a good position. How did you manage to
keep such strong contacts with the Navy in any
submarine warfare between 45 and 50? Was it the
contacts you primarily made in World War II? It was
the contacts which a great many people. There were
about half a dozen oceanographers who had been
quite close to the submarine people. And our
principal contacts, permanent ones, were
through the submarine people. This rapidly grew.
The variable depth sonar brought us much more into
destroyers.
Then a program which was undertaken I
better be careful of the dates here, but
undertaken in certainly the mid-50s was one that
Hersey was many of us were responsible for, but
Hersey really took it under his wing, was
explosive echo ranging and working with naval
aviators so that they could try and do echo ranging
using explosives as a source, using their
sonoboys for receivers. Here we cooperated
closely with the Canadians, a great many of the
American people, and our submarine people were
also important because Woods Hole had good
contacts with the submarine people, and so we
often got the targets for the aviators to work on.
Next
question. Those were the four questions I had.
I've obviously been talking with a very heavy
strain of Navy here.
This did not occupy the majority of my time,
although the Navy was the one that paid my salary
and the one that I had the greatest concern with. In
my own case, we were spending a lot of time in
instrumentation. Incidentally, when I arrived
at Woods Hole, When Morris Ewing and I and Warzell
arrived at Woods Hole, Woods Hole had almost no
machinery. I believe one small south bend lathe
and one drill press.
Ewing and I had a small machine shop enough to both
fill up and weight down a five-ton dump truck,
which we brought up to Woods Hole with us for
about... Three years, that really was the Woods
Hole shop was about 90% our personal shop. We
finally sold this machinery off, a little bit for
the money, but primarily because we were
convinced that if we left our machine shop there,
the institution would never have a shop of its own.
And this forced them to go out and buy better
equipment than they would have otherwise.
Why don't you shut it down?